README.md, before:

# Applied Mathematics: an Introduction to Scientific Computing by Numerical Analysis

This repository contains material for the course _Applied Mathematics: an Introduction to Scientific Computing by Numerical Analysis_, academic year 2024-2025. 

### Lecturers
- Michele Girfoglio (<mgirfogl@sissa.it>)
- Gianluigi Rozza (<grozza@sissa.it>)

### Tutoring and exercise sessions
- Ariel S. Boiardi (<aboiardi@sissa.it>)

## Course information

This is a Joint course, between SISSA PhD in Mathematical Analysis, Modeling, and Applications, Laurea Magistrale in Matematica, and Laurea Magistrale in Data Science and Scientific Computing.

Lectures are held live on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 16:00 to 18:00 in room A-005 of the main SISSA Building.

Recordings from past years lectures are available at the following links:

- [Recordings for lectures of 2021-2022](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLcvf2raG3YsEA25P3qC1LbGVAPRXGZLJI)

- [Recordings for lectures of 2020-2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLArvQL9bsv1y6BhTNOthBj1hGijN3vuCh)


## Online lectures and recordings

In order to join online lectures and access recordings of the lectures, you need to be registered as a Microsoft Teams user with an account from University of Trieste. 

Interested students should send a request to <didattica.dmg@units.it>, indicating
that they are SISSA students, taking Prof. Rozza's course and need credentials
to access Teams, accompanied by the following information:

- first and last name
- place and date of birth
- tax code
- address of residence or domicile in Italy
- scanned copy of valid front/back ID document


## Syllabus 2024-2025
Four Modules of 12h each (1.5 CFU for each module), for a total of 48h, 6 CFU

### Frontal Lectures

#### Module 1 (Basis of Numerical Analysis - Part I - Dr. Michele Girfoglio)

- Well posedness, condition numbers
- Polynomial based approximations
  - Power basis interpolation, 
  - Lagrange interpolation
  - Weierstrass approximation theorem)
- Interpolatory Quadrature rules
  - Orthogonal polynomials and Gauss Quadrature Formulas
  - L2 projection
- Review of elementary PDEs
  - Introduction to Finite Difference Methods
  - Introduction to Finite Element Methods

#### Module 2 (Basis of Numerical Analysis - Part II - Prof. Ganluigi Rozza)

- Least square methods
- Solution methods for Linear Systems
  - direct solvers
  - iterative solvers
- Eigenvalues/Eigenvectors
- Solution methods for non-Linear systems
- Review of ODEs

#### Module 3 (Basis of Numerical Modeling - Prof. Gianluigi Rozza)

- Data assimilation in biomechanics, statistics, medicine, - electric signals
- Model order reduction of matrices
- Linear models for hydraulics, networks, logistics
- State equations (real gases), applied mechanics systems, - grow population models, financial problems
- Applications of ODEs
- example in electric phenomena, signals and dynamics of - populations (Lotke-Volterra)
- Models for prey-predator, population dynamics, automatic - controls
- Applications of PDEs, the poisson problem
  - Elastic rope
  - Bar under traction
  - Heat conductivity
  - Maxwell equation

#### Module 4 (Numerical Analysis with Python - Dr. Pierfrancesco Siena/Dr. Michele Girfoglio)

- Introduction to Python, Numpy, Scipy
- Working with numpy arrays, matrices and nd-arrays
- Exercises on Condition numbers, interpolation, quadratures
- Using numpy for polynomial approximation
- Using numpy for numerical integration
- Using numpy/scipy for ODEs
- Solving non-linear systems of equations
- Using numpy/scipy for simple PDEs

### Students projects

Application of the Finite Element Method / Finite Difference Method to the solution of models taken from the course

### Further material provided during lectures by Prof. Gianluigi Rozza at <https://people.sissa.it/~grozza/amnasc/>

## References and Text Books:

-   A. Quarteroni, R. Sacco, and F. Saleri. *Numerical mathematics*,
    volume 37 of Texts in Applied Mathe- matics. Springer-Verlag, New
    York, 2000.
    [\[E-Book-ITA\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-0818-2) [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b98885)
-   A. Quarteroni. *Modellistica Numerica per problemi differenziali*.
    Springer, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ITA\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-0494-8)
-   A. Quarteroni. *Numerical Models for Differential Problems*.
    Springer, 2009.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-1071-0)
-   A. Quarteroni and A. Valli. *Numerical approximation of partial
    differential equations*. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85268-1)
-   S. Brenner and L. Scott. *The mathematical theory of finite element
    methods*. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-75934-0)
-   D. Boffi, F. Brezzi, L. Demkowicz, R. Durán, R. Falk, and M.
    Fortin. *Mixed finite elements, compatibility conditions, and
    applications*. Lectures given at the C.I.M.E. Summer School held in
    Cetraro, Italy June 26–July 1, 2006. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78319-0)
-   D. Arnold. *A concise introduction to numerical analysis*. Institute
    for Mathematics and its Applications, Minneapolis, 2001.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.ima.umn.edu/~arnold/597.00-01/nabook.pdf)
-   A. Quarteroni, F. Saleri, P. Gervasio.* Scientific Computing with
    Matlab and Octave*. Springer Verlag, 2006.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-45366-3)
-   B. Gustaffson* Fundamentals of Scientific Computing, *Springer,
    2011
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-19494-8)
-   Tveito, A., Langtangen, H.P., Nielsen, B.F., Cai, X. *Elements of
    Scientific Computing, *Springer, 2010
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-11298-0)

Note that, when connecting from SISSA, all of the text books above are
available in full text as pdf files.


## Licencing

 [![Creative Commons License](http://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/logos/cc.logo.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

The content of this repository is distributed with a Creative Common licence. See
the file [LICENSE](./LICENSE) in this directory for more information.

## Attribution

Some of the material in this repository was adapted from the python-lectures by [Robert Johansson](https://github.com/jrjohansson/scientific-python-lectures). Take a look at his repository for additional material and lectures.

**Please consider contributing pull requests to correct typos, or better document the material in this repository!**

Commit message:

Update README with tutor contact information and project details

README.md, after:

# Applied Mathematics: an Introduction to Scientific Computing by Numerical Analysis

This repository contains material for the course _Applied Mathematics: an Introduction to Scientific Computing by Numerical Analysis_, academic year 2024-2025. 

### Lecturers
- Michele Girfoglio (<mgirfogl@sissa.it>)
- Gianluigi Rozza (<grozza@sissa.it>)

### Tutoring and exercise sessions
- Ariel S. Boiardi (<aboiardi@sissa.it>)

## Course information

This is a Joint course, between SISSA PhD in Mathematical Analysis, Modeling, and Applications, Laurea Magistrale in Matematica, and Laurea Magistrale in Data Science and Scientific Computing.

Lectures are held live on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 16:00 to 18:00 in room A-005 of the main SISSA Building.

Recordings from past years lectures are available at the following links:

- [Recordings for lectures of 2021-2022](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLcvf2raG3YsEA25P3qC1LbGVAPRXGZLJI)

- [Recordings for lectures of 2020-2021](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLArvQL9bsv1y6BhTNOthBj1hGijN3vuCh)


## Online lectures and recordings

In order to join online lectures and access recordings of the lectures, you need to be registered as a Microsoft Teams user with an account from University of Trieste. 

Interested students should send a request to <didattica.dmg@units.it>, indicating
that they are SISSA students, taking Prof. Rozza's course and need credentials
to access Teams, accompanied by the following information:

- first and last name
- place and date of birth
- tax code
- address of residence or domicile in Italy
- scanned copy of valid front/back ID document


## Syllabus 2024-2025
Four Modules of 12h each (1.5 CFU for each module), for a total of 48h, 6 CFU

### Frontal Lectures

#### Module 1 (Basis of Numerical Analysis - Part I - Dr. Michele Girfoglio)

- Well posedness, condition numbers
- Polynomial based approximations
  - Power basis interpolation, 
  - Lagrange interpolation
  - Weierstrass approximation theorem)
- Interpolatory Quadrature rules
  - Orthogonal polynomials and Gauss Quadrature Formulas
  - L2 projection
- Review of elementary PDEs
  - Introduction to Finite Difference Methods
  - Introduction to Finite Element Methods

#### Module 2 (Basis of Numerical Analysis - Part II - Prof. Ganluigi Rozza)

- Least square methods
- Solution methods for Linear Systems
  - direct solvers
  - iterative solvers
- Eigenvalues/Eigenvectors
- Solution methods for non-Linear systems
- Review of ODEs

#### Module 3 (Basis of Numerical Modeling - Prof. Gianluigi Rozza)

- Data assimilation in biomechanics, statistics, medicine, - electric signals
- Model order reduction of matrices
- Linear models for hydraulics, networks, logistics
- State equations (real gases), applied mechanics systems, - grow population models, financial problems
- Applications of ODEs
- example in electric phenomena, signals and dynamics of - populations (Lotke-Volterra)
- Models for prey-predator, population dynamics, automatic - controls
- Applications of PDEs, the poisson problem
  - Elastic rope
  - Bar under traction
  - Heat conductivity
  - Maxwell equation

#### Module 4 (Numerical Analysis with Python - Mr. Ariel S. Boiardi / Dr. Michele Girfoglio)

- Introduction to Python, Numpy, Scipy
- Working with numpy arrays, matrices and nd-arrays
- Exercises on Condition numbers, interpolation, quadratures
- Using numpy for polynomial approximation
- Using numpy for numerical integration
- Using numpy/scipy for ODEs
- Solving non-linear systems of equations
- Using numpy/scipy for simple PDEs

### Students projects

The final project has been presented during the last Lab session of the course on 18/12/2024. 
The assignments are described the dedicated [notebook](./material/Lab_Final_project.ipynb). 
For questions related to the assignments, please contact the tutor [Ariel S. Boiardi](mailto://aboiardi@sissa.it).

### Further material provided during lectures by Prof. Gianluigi Rozza at <https://people.sissa.it/~grozza/amnasc/>

## References and Text Books:

-   A. Quarteroni, R. Sacco, and F. Saleri. *Numerical mathematics*,
    volume 37 of Texts in Applied Mathe- matics. Springer-Verlag, New
    York, 2000.
    [\[E-Book-ITA\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-0818-2) [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b98885)
-   A. Quarteroni. *Modellistica Numerica per problemi differenziali*.
    Springer, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ITA\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-0494-8)
-   A. Quarteroni. *Numerical Models for Differential Problems*.
    Springer, 2009.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-88-470-1071-0)
-   A. Quarteroni and A. Valli. *Numerical approximation of partial
    differential equations*. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-85268-1)
-   S. Brenner and L. Scott. *The mathematical theory of finite element
    methods*. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-75934-0)
-   D. Boffi, F. Brezzi, L. Demkowicz, R. Durán, R. Falk, and M.
    Fortin. *Mixed finite elements, compatibility conditions, and
    applications*. Lectures given at the C.I.M.E. Summer School held in
    Cetraro, Italy June 26–July 1, 2006. Springer Verlag, 2008.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78319-0)
-   D. Arnold. *A concise introduction to numerical analysis*. Institute
    for Mathematics and its Applications, Minneapolis, 2001.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.ima.umn.edu/~arnold/597.00-01/nabook.pdf)
-   A. Quarteroni, F. Saleri, P. Gervasio.* Scientific Computing with
    Matlab and Octave*. Springer Verlag, 2006.
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-45366-3)
-   B. Gustaffson* Fundamentals of Scientific Computing, *Springer,
    2011
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-19494-8)
-   Tveito, A., Langtangen, H.P., Nielsen, B.F., Cai, X. *Elements of
    Scientific Computing, *Springer, 2010
    [\[E-Book-ENG\]](http://www.springer.com/mathematics/computational+science+%26+engineering/book/978-3-642-11298-0)

Note that, when connecting from SISSA, all of the text books above are
available in full text as pdf files.


## Licencing

 [![Creative Commons License](http://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/logos/cc.logo.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

The content of this repository is distributed with a Creative Common licence. See
the file [LICENSE](./LICENSE) in this directory for more information.

## Attribution

Some of the material in this repository was adapted from the python-lectures by [Robert Johansson](https://github.com/jrjohansson/scientific-python-lectures). Take a look at his repository for additional material and lectures.

**Please consider contributing pull requests to correct typos, or better document the material in this repository!**
